# `clinicadl retrain` - Launch a new network training based on a previously trained network

This command allows to train a network defined in a `commandline.json` generated by 
[`clinicadl train`](./Train/Introduction.md) or 
[`clinicadl random-search generate`](RandomSearch.md#clinicadl-random-search-generate--train-random-models-sampled-from-a-defined-hyperparameter-space).

This is particularly useful for outputs of random search, as the random architecture
produced my be not straightforward to implement.

!!! note "Training from json file"
    You don't actually need to have the complete folder of the network used as a reference.
    The only file used in this function is `commandline.json` so you can also manually create this file
    and store it in `model_path`.

## Prerequisites

Please check which preprocessing needs to
be performed in the `commandline.json` file in the results folder. If it has
not been performed, execute the preprocessing pipeline as well as `clinicadl
extract` to obtain the tensor versions of the images.

## Running the task
This task can be run with the following command line:
```Text
clinicadl retrain <model_path> <output_dir>

```
where 
- `model_path` (str) is a path to the folder where the reference model and the json file 
are stored.
- `output_dir` (str) is a path to the folder of the new model that will be trained.

By default all the arguments will correspond to the ones used to train the reference model.
However you can change any of these by setting a new value to the optional parameters.

!!! note "Optional parameters"
    For more information on the optional parameters, please check [`clinicadl train` 
    description](./Train/Introduction.md#running-the-task)

## Outputs

The outputs correspond to the ones obtained using [`clinicadl train`](./Train/Introduction.md#outputs).
